# 7. CQRS

Date: 2024-08-27

___

## Status

Accepted

___

## Context

Sometimes our application will have several entry points just like http controller or cli command. We don't want break
DRY rule, so we need one place to keep information what we want to do and how to do it. In modern applications it is
also good to consider dividing read and write operations and even have separated databases for that. Another problem
comes with optimization of long processes which blocks the rest of application.

___

## Decision

https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html <br>
As described in the article above we can use CQRS (Command Query Responsibility Segregation). Basing on the example of
our application we will end up with following objects:

- Command - changes state of the system
- Query - reads the state of the system
- Event - can be emitted after command is processed

Thanks to this approach we can dispatch any Command / Query / Event in any entrypoint expecting the same result. Every
object will have its handler with logic how to do an operation described by this object. 

What about optimization and performance. Having knowledge that any Command process is taking to much time we can easily
put it's processing into the queue system and do it asynchronously.

___

## Consequences

Any operation in the system should be mapped for Command, Query or Event. Event emitting can follow to event hell which
is bad thing, and we should avoid it. Going with CQRS approach it's a good idea to choose library which can handle the
logic of command bus and asynchronous channels. Choosing asynchronous processing of some Commands, Queries, Events, we
will have to choose queue system offered by the market.
